Now, there's nothing new what we saw so
far.
We've just rearranged
terms in finite sums.
But here comes the trick that
defines the leaky integrator filter.
When M is very large,
we assume that the average over M-1 or
over M point is going to
be pretty much the same.
Not much is going to change if we add a
single data point to a very long average.
And also, when M is very large, lambda,
which is defined as M -1 over M,
is going to be very close to 1.
So, we can rewrite the previous
equation as, current estimate for
the moving average is equal to lambda
times the previous estimate for
a moving average + 1-
lambda x the current input.
And this defines a filter that we
can use to process our signal.
Now the filter is recursive because
we are using output values,
previous output values to compute
the current value of the output.
So there is a feedback path that goes
from the output back into the filter.
Before we even try to analyze
this let's see if it works.
So we take our smooth signal
corrupted by noise and
we filter it with a leaky integrator for
varying values of lambda.
So if we start with lambda rather small
we don't see really see much happening.
But as we increase the value
of lambda towards one,
which is really the operating assumption
for the derivation of the filter anyway,
we see that we start to smooth
the signal as we expected.
And when lambda is very close to one, the
smoothing power is comparable to that of
a moving average filter with
a very high number of tabs.
But now the difference is that each output
value only requires three operations.
Because remember,
the value is simply 1 multiplication and
then there's going to be another
multiplication and 1 sum.
And this is independent
of the value of lambda,
so highest motion power at a fixed price.
Of course the natural question
when we have a filter is what
the impulse response is going to be.
And to compute the impulse response of
the leaky integrator, all we need to do is
plug the delta function into the recursive
equation and see what happens.
So when n is less than 0,
since the delta function is 0 from
minus infinity to 0, nothing non-0 has
ever happened inside this equation.
And so it's very safe to assume
that the output will be 0 for
all values of n less than zero.
Things start to happen
when n reaches zero at
which point the delta function kicks and
assumes a value of one.
So if we compute the value of the output
for n = to 0, we have lambda times
the previous value of the output,
which we know to be zero, so this is zero.
Plus 1 minus lambda times the value
of delta and 0, which is 1.
And so the output would be 1 minus lambda.
At the next step y of 1 is equal to lambda
times the previous value of the output,
which now is not known as 0,
it's 1 minus lambda as we computed before.
Plus 1 minus lambda times delta 1, which
we know to be 0 and so this is cancelled.
And the final output is lambda
times 1 when it's lambda.
At the next step, once again the recursive
equation kicks in and we have lambda
times the previous value which we know
to be lambda times 1 when it's lambda.
Plus 1 minus lambda delta of 2.
But again delta from now
on is going to be 0, so
this term we don't even have to look at.
And so you will have lambda
square times 1 minus lambda.
Next step is going to be the same and
you have pretty much understood
what's going on here.
If we plot the impulse response we have
an exponentially decaying function.
Where the exponential base is lambda and
the whole curve is weighted by
one minus lambda and is of course
multiplied by uni step because
everything is zero for n less than zero.
You might wonder why we call
this filter a leaky integrator.
The reason is because if you consider for
instance this very simple sum.
It's the sum of all input samples
from minus infinity to current time.
This is really the discrete time
approximation to an integral
because you're really accumulating
all pass values up to now.
And we can rewrite this
summation here as such.
So at each step we get what we have
accumulated up to the previous step and
we sum the current input.
So you see it's very
close to the equation for
the leaky integrator, except in the leaky
integrator what we do is the following.
We scale the previous accumulated
value by lambda, which means we,
remember, lambda is close to 1, so
that means we keep pretty much all of what
we've accumulated before, but we forget
a little bit, we leak a part of it.
If lambda is equal to 0.9, then that means
that 10% of what we accumulated is lost.
And we've replaced what we've
lost by a fraction of the input,
and this fraction is 1- lambda.
So what we've lost from the accumulator,
we've replaced with equal
percentage of the input.
The idea is that by picking lambda < 1,
we are forgetting, we're leaking the past,
and the accumulation will never blow up.